(upbeat music)
I hope you're ready to actually
do some stuff with JavaScript.
These videos are going to be about functions
and they're not going to be exhaustive
cause there's so much more we need to learn
in order to actually take advantage of them,
but we are going to get a good primer on
what functions are, the core concepts,
and an overview of the different types
of functions that you can write.
The rest of the entire course
is going to be using functions since they are, like types,
a fundamental building block of Java Script.
That's how we're going to sort of get good with them
is we're going to be writing functions
for the rest of this entire course.
So what are they?
Well, functions allow us to group together
sets of statements.
Remember?
Let's take at some of our code here.
What's a statement?
Well, this is a statement right here
where we maybe set a variable.
This is a statement here where we set a variable
and do like a condition.
This is a statement right here where we actually go off
and run console dot log so we can see the data.
So all of this stuff if you wanna ever group it together,
generally they're related to each other
and generally they produce some sort of output.
So we wanna group those instructions together
inside of a function.
Now, functions can take in data,
and those are known as arguments.
We're gonna talk about difference between
arguments and parameters in a just a second
but know that when you pass in data into a function
that's called an argument.
And then they perform some work
and that is what is referred to as a statement
and then sometimes they also return a value.
Okay, that was a lot there.
So let's take a look at math dot max.
This is a good one.
So math dot max is a function.
It's actually something called a method.
We'll talk about the difference
between a function and a method,
it's not much, in a bit.
But math dot max is the function.
Now if you run it, it gives you negative infinity.
I'm not really sure why because we didn't pass it any data.
But we actually need to pass it some data.
And what math dot max will do is it will
return us the maximum value.
So if we pass it two numbers, ten and twelve,
it's going to return to us the highest number,
which is twelve, right?
Makes sense.
So what's going on here, right?
So this line right here, that is a Java Script statement.
This pieces of data that you pass in to the function,
so if you wanna give a function multiple pieces of data
you simply just put a comma between each of them,
and it's sort of a best practice to put
a space in between each of these.
These things are called arguments.
So the data that you pass to a function,
the data that you give to a function in order for it to run,
is called a argument.
And then sometimes functions will return to you
some data that is generally like the answer
or the computed output based on what you pass in.
In this case it's going to return us twelve.
So similarly we can say like math dot floor,
if we pass it two point four four four
it will return to us two.
It gives us the floor of that actual value.
So in this case, we just pass one argument of
two point four four four and it returns to us two.
So there is a whole bunch of
built in functions in Java Script.
So like the browser and node and
whatever Java Script run time you're using,
they come with all of these built in things.
And we've already been sort of sneakily using them
because like there's no way around it.
And probably the one we've used most
so far is console dot log.
And what console dot log will do is
you just say "hey" and what that will do is
it actually just logs it into the thing.
You'll notice that this thing returned to us undefined.
You know that it's returned because in the console,
the statement is what you write on the arrow pointing in,
and then the arrow pointing back with a dot
is what gets returned to you after you run that function.
So our statement, math dot max ten and twelve,
returned to us twelve.
Statement math dot floor returns to us two.
Console dot log hey, it logs hey
but then it returns to us undefined.
Like why is that?
Well not all functions are meant to
actually return to you values.
Sometimes functions just go off and do a bunch of work,
in this case this function does one thing.
It logs hey to the console and then it's over.
It doesn't have anything to give back to us.
It doesn't say like hey I'm back.
I brought you like this t-shirt or something like that.
It didn't bring us back anything.
So in that case it returns to us undefined
and that's totally fine because not all functions
return to us values.
So let's look at some of the other ones that we've got here.
We've got Parse float that will take in
if we've take twenty point three
it will return to us-
Oh, sorry no.
If you pass it a string,
it will return to us a number.
So this is all about types.
You take in strings and it returns to us a number.
Parse Int does something similar,
we looked at that earlier.
It will take in a string and return a integer,
which is a whole number.
Again they both return numbers,
but it's just telling us whether we
should keep the decimal or not.
We looked at math dot round, math dot seal, math dot floor.
There's a whole bunch of date functions
which we're going to go into
but if you take a look at capital D date dot now
that is a function that takes no arguments,
so you don't need to pass anything to it
cause it doesn't need anything,
and what is actually returns to us is the number of
milliseconds since God created the earth I always say.
But it's the number of milliseconds
since like January 1, 1970 or something like that.
So you see if I run it over and over
it's always changing.
Actually if you go to epoch dot now dot s h,
there's this little tool that I use
and what it does is if you take like,
let's see, I ran this one right here,
paste it in and it says it's June 11th, 2019 at 11:48 a.m.
You can also do the opposite,
so if I were to go and pick some sort of date in the future
and also select a time.
Press okay, it will give us the number of milliseconds.
Some other programing languages use seconds
but Java Script goes down to the millisecond,
which is exactly what we want right here.
So that is dates.
We're going to go much more into dates
and actually working with them
but that's just an example of one of
the built in functions that we have.
We also have functions that will sort of
work with the, what's called the dom,
work with the HTML elements that are on the page.
So let's actually go ahead and
make a new file called functions dot HTML.
And we'll use our HTML base,
and we'll just call it functions.
And then here I'll give a script tag,
and above that script tag let's give ourselves
a paragraph tag that says hey how ya doin?
Open that up in your browser.
Now if we were to do this,
const p is equal to document dot query selector quote p
and then console log p after that.
What we're doing here is we're running a function
called document dot query selector.
We pass it what's called a selector.
Again, we have a entire section of this course on this.
I know that I keep saying that
but this is sort of just a primer.
And then what it does is it
will find something that matches this selector,
much like CSS does,
and puts it into a variable
and then I go ahead and log that variable.
And now we see that there's a paragraph there.
There's all kinds of other functions that are in it.
There's some cool mobile ones.
There's like navigator dot, I think, vibrate.
Yeah, navigator dot vibrate, and uh
Navigator failed to execute vibrate on navigator.
One argument required but only zero present.
So here's another good example is
if you don't know what arguments that a function should take
we like to use the Mozilla developer network docs
in order to see what's going on.
So let's do it.
Navigator vibrate
and usually you'll look for the Mozilla developer.
If you want you can also just put MDN in the search
and what that will do is it will make sure that the
Mozilla docs sort of float to the top which is good.
The Google Chrome stuff is also good,
but let's take a look here.
And this is generally what you find for a function.
It says it's a method, it is.
We'll go into what that is in just a second.
If such hardware exists,
if the device doesn't support vibration
this method has no effect.
If a vibration pattern is already in progress,
blah, blah, blah.
So it kinda talks about what is does
and then it usually will also tell you what it returns.
So if the method is unable to vibrate
because of invalid parameters it will return false.
Did that happen?
Navigator dot - no it didn't return false.
It just returned an error.
It didn't return anything, it just errored out.
That's probably because we didn't pass it anything.
Good.
And then the syntax is going to tell us
what it is that we need to pass it.
So it's telling us that we need
to run navigator dot vibrate,
we'll talk about what this window dot is in a future video,
and then pass it a pattern, that's the one argument.
Well what is a pattern?
Well we'll go down here.
Provides a pattern of vibration and pause intervals.
Each value indicates a number of milliseconds or-
ooh, that's kinda cool.
So you can give it a two hundred milliseconds
or you can pass it what, this is called an array.
We'll go into what those are but, essentially,
it's just a list of multiple values, so.
All right, go here.
Pass it two hundred.
It should return false because I'm on my computer
and it won't work but,
ooh it returned true.
What? Did my laptop vibrate?
No.
Weird, well it (laughs)
It said it should return false if it's inable to vibrate
but maybe it just sorta like gives it to the OS
and it says all right I passed it off to the OS
and the OS should vibrate the device if it's on there.
So, again, obviously it's not going to work on a computer
that doesn't have it but if you were to, I'm sure,
if you pulled that up on an Android phone,
not sure if it's supported on iOS,
but this is just a whole world of possible functions
that are out there that we can use to work.
And really that's how we're going to start to build up
our own library of functions and
we're going to build up custom functionalities.
Soon we'll make our own functions,
which are composed of other functions,
and they sorta group together a bunch.
So maybe we wanna figure out a bunch of math,
select an element on the page and then vibrate the phone.
You can put that all into a single function.
Let's look at a couple more here.
Let's clear it out.
If you have a bunch of text on the page,
so let's go ahead and do that paragraph,
take lorem five hundred, hit tab.
So I'm using the Emmet extension there,
that should give us a bunch of text on the page.
And do that over again.
Paragraph, lorem two hundred, good.
Paragraph, lorem one thousand.
So there we go, lots of things
and we should be able to just type scroll to
and we wanna scroll to two hundred.
Failed to execute scroll to window,
parameter one options is not an object.
Okay so again I don't know how to use it
so we would do MDN scroll to.
Here we go.
Look for it, oh that's not the one we want.
This one is window dot scroll two.
We'll talk about element methods and
window methods in the future,
but it tells us that you need to
pass it an x coordinate and a y coordinate.
So maybe we didn't pass the y coordinate.
Let's try, we don't want to scroll zero.
Oh, I think it's the other way around.
How does x and y, I was terrible at Battle Ship.
Ooh, there we go!
So what that did is it just jumped the window,
maybe I'll jump it down to five hundred,
and it will jump it down.
I believe that there are some options,
yeah it says here parameters.
You can either pass an x and a y,
or you can pass an options object.
So we'll go down here.
Options is a scroll to options dictionary,
that's kind of a word we use in Java Script to represent
an object so that's not a special thing in Java Script
that's just an object that has a
number of set properties on it.
So if we look here, you'll see that we're passing an object.
So this is a great example of how you
can pass any type to a function.
So in this case we're passing two numbers
but it's also an option to pass one object, a type of object
and inside of that object it gives you
a top, a left, and a behavior.
Let's take a look at that.
Clear it out.
Gonna say scroll to some curly brackets,
top five hundred left zero is the behavior.
Smooth, so that is a string.
Ooh, I like it.
Five hundred, six hundred, scrolls down.
Top zero scrolls back to the top.
So you see that's how one of these functions
returns nothing to us, undefined,
but it just goes off and does some work to us.
If you wanna know what all of the options are for that
I think we can click on this one.
Scroll to options
and, I think the-
Let's take a look for behavior.
Here we go.
Scroll to options dot behavior, smooth or auto.
Auto is the default, smooth is the only other option.
There's no other like fun,
fun ones that we could put it there.
So that is our default functions.
Those are functions that are built in.
I'm obviously not going to go through all of them
because there's literally,
there's probably thousands of them in the browser
and we're just going to learn them as we start to
actually build real stuff in the browser and
build some fun examples.
In the next video what we're going to do
is look at how we can create our own functions from scratch.